Seven Transformations of Leadership.

Leaders are made, not born, and how theydevelop is critical for organizational change.Transformationsof Leadershipby David Rooke and William R.TorbertMOST DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGISTS agree that whatdifferentiates leaders is not so much their philosophy ofleadership, their personality, or their style of management.Rather, it's their intemal "action logic"-how they interpret theirsurroundings and react when their power or safety is challenged.Relatively few leaders, however, try to understand their own actionlogic, and fewer still have explored the possibility of changing it.They should, because we've found that leaders who do under-take a voyage of personal understanding and development cantransform not only their own capabilities but also those of theircompanies. In our close collaboration with psychologist SusanneCook-Greuter - and our 25 years of extensive survey-based con-suiting at companies such as Deutsche Bank, Harvard PilgrimHealth Care, Hewlett-Packard, NSA, Trillium Asset Management,Aviva, and Volvo - we've worked with thousands of executives asthey've tried to develop their leadership skills. The good news isthat leaders who make an effort to understand their own actionlogic can improve their ability to lead. But to do that, it's importantfirst to understand what kind of leader you already are.APRIL 2005 67

Seven Transformations of LeadershipThe Seven Action LogicsOur research is based on a sentence-completion surveytool called the Leadership Development Profile. Usingthis tool, participants are asked to complete 36 sentencesthat begin with phrases such as "A good leader...," towhich responses vary widely;"...cracks the whip.""...realizes that it's important to achieve good perfor-mance from subordinates.""...juggles competing forces and takes responsibilityfor her decisions."By asking participants to complete sentences of thistype, it's possible for highly trained evaluators to paint apicture of how participants interpret their own actionsand the world around them; these "pictures" show whichone of seven developmental action logics-Opportunist,Diplomat, Expert, Achiever, Individualist, Strategist, or Al-chemist-currently functions as a leader's dominant wayof thinking. Leaders can move through these categories astheir abilities grow, so taking the Leadership Develop-ment Profile again several years later can reveal whethera leader's action logic has evolved.Over the past 25 years, we and other researchers haveadministered the sentence-completion survey to thou-sands of managers and professionals, most between theages of 25 and 55, at hundreds of American and Euro-pean companies (as well as nonprofits and governmentalagencies) in diverse industries. What we found is that thelevels of corporate and individual performance vary ac-cording to action logic. Notably, we found that the threetypes of leaders associated with below-average corpo-rate performance (Opportunists, Diplomats, and Experts)accounted for 55% of our sample. They were significantlyless effective at implementing organizational strategiesthan the 30% of the sample who measured as Achievers.Moreover, only the final 15% of managers in the sample(Individualists, Strategists, and Alchemists) showed theconsistent capacity to innovate and to successfully trans-form their organizations.To understand how leaders fall into such distinct cate-gories and corporate performance, let's look in more de-tail at each leadership style in turn, starting with the leastproductive (and least complex).The OpportunistOur most comforting finding was that only 5% of the lead-ers in our sample were characterized by mistrust, ego-centrism, and manipulativeness. We call these leadersOpportunists, a title that refiects their tendency to focuson personal wins and see the world and other people asopportunities to be exploited. Their approach to the out-side world is largely determined by their perception ofcontrol - in other words, how they will react to an eventdepends primarily on whether or not they think they candirect the outcome. They treat other people as objects oras competitors who are also out for themselves.Opportunists tend to regard their bad behavior as le-gitimate in the cut and thrust of an eye-for-an-eye world.They reject feedback, externalize blame, and retaliateharshly. One can see this action logic in the early work ofLarry Ellison (now CEO of Oracle). Ellison describes hismanagerial style at the start of his career as"managementby ridicule.""You've got to be good at intellectual intimi-dation and rhetorical bullying," he once told MatthewSymonds of the Economist. "I'd excuse my behavior bytelling myself I was just having 'an open and honest de-bate.'The fact is, I just didn't know any better."Few Opportunists remain managers for long, unlessthey transform to more effective action logics (as Ellisonhas done). Their constant firefighting, their style of self-aggrandizement, and their frequent rule breaking is theantithesis of the kind of leader people want to work withfor the long term. If you have worked for an Opportunist,you will almost certainly remember it as a difficult time.By the same token, corporate environments that breedopportunism seldom endure, although Opportunistsoften survive longer than they should because they pro-vide an exciting environment in which younger execu-tives, especially, can take risks. As one ex-Enron seniorstaffer said, "Before the fall, those were such excitingyears. We felt we could do anything, pull off everything,write our own rules. The pace was wild, and we all justrode it." Of course, Enron's shareholders and pensionerswould reasonably feel that they were paying too heavilyfor that staffer's adventure.The DiplomatThe Diplomat makes sense of the world around him ina more benign way than the Opportunist does, but thisaction logic can also have extremely negative repercus-sions if the leader is a senior manager. Loyally serving thegroup, the Diplomat seeks to please higher-status col-leagues while avoiding confiict. This action logic is fo-cused on gaining control of one's own behavior - morethan on gaining control of external events or other peo-ple. According to the Diplomat's action logic, a leadergains more enduring acceptance and infiuence by coop-erating with group norms and by performing his dailyroles well.David Rooke (david@harthilt.co.uk) is a partner at Harthil! Consulting in Hewelsfield, England. William R. Torbert (torbert@bc.edu) is a professor at Boston College's Carroll School of Management in Massachusetts. They are coauthors o/" ActionInquiry: The Secret of Timely and Transforming Leadership (Berrett-Koehler, 2004)-68 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW

Seven Transformations of LeadershipSeven Ways of LeadingDifferent leaders exhibit different kinds of action logic-ways in which they interpret their surroundings and react whentheir power or safety is challenged. In our research of thousands of leaders, we observed seven types of action logics.The least effective for organizational leadership are the Opportunist and Diplomat; the most effective, the Strategistand Alchemist. Knowing your own action logic can be the first step toward developing a more effective leadership style.If you recognize yourself as an Individualist, for example, you can work, through both format and informal measures,to develop the strengths and characteristics ofa Strategist.Action Logic CharacteristicsOpportunist Wins any way possible. Self-oriented;manipulative; "might makes right."Diplomat Avoids overt conflict Wants to belong;obeys group norms; rarely rocks theboat,StrengthsCood in emergencies andin sales opportunities.Good as supportive gluewithin an office; helps bringpeople together.% of researchsample profiling atthis action logic5%12%ExpertAchieverRules by logic and expertise. Seeksrational efficiency.Meets strategic goals. Effectivelyachieves goals through teams; jugglesmanagerial duties and marketdemands.Good as an individualcontributor.VJeW suited to managerialroles; action and goaloriented.38%30%Individualist Interweaves competing personal andcompany action logics. Creates uniquestructures to resolve gaps betweenstrategy and performance.Effertive in venture andconsulting roles. 10%Strategist Generates organizational and personaltransformations. Exercises the powerof mutual inquiry, vigilance, andvulnerability for both the short andlong term.Effective as a transforma-tional leader. 4%Alchemist Generates social transformations. Inte-grates material, spiritual, and societaltransformation.Good at leading society-widetransformations. 1%In a support role or a team context, this type of execu-tive has much to offer. Diplomats provide social glue totheir colleagues and ensure that attention is paid to theneeds of others, which is probably why the great majorityof Diplomats work at the most junior rungs of manage-ment, in jobs such as frontline supervisor, customer ser-vice representative, or nurse practitioner. Indeed, researchinto 497 managers in different industries showed that 8o%of all Diplomats were at junior levels. By contrast, 8o% ofall Strategists were at senior levels, suggesting that manag-ers who grow into more effective action logics-like that ofthe Strategist -have a greater chance of being promoted.APRIL 2005 69

Seven Transformations of LeadershipDiplomats are much more problematic in top leader-ship roles because they try to ignore conflict. They tend tobe overly polite and friendly and find it virtually impos-sible to give challenging feedback to others. Initiatingchange, with its inevitable conflicts, represents a gravethreat to the Diplomat, and he will avoid it if at all possi-ble, even to the point of self-destruction.Consider one Diplomat who became the interim CEOof an organization when his predecessor died suddenlyfrom an aneurysm. When the board split on the selectionof a permanent successor, it asked the Diplomat to carryon.Our Diplomat relished his role as a ceremonial figure-head and was a sought-after speaker at public events. Un-fortunately, he found the more conflictual requirementsof the job less to his liking. He failed, for instance, to re-place a number of senior managers wbo had seriousongoing performance issues and were resisting thechange program his predecessor had initiated. Becausethe changes were controversial, the Diplomat avoidedmeetings, even planning business trips for the times whenthe senior team would meet. The team members were sofrustrated by the Diplomat's attitude that they eventuallyresigned en masse. He "resolved" this crisis by thankingthe team publicly for its contribution and appointing newteam members. Eventually, in the face of mounting lossesarising from this poor management, the board decided todemote the Diplomat to his former role as vice presidentThe ExpertThe largest category of leader is that of Experts, who ac-count for 38% of all professionals in our sample. In con-trast to Opportunists, who focus on trying to control theworld around them, and Diplomats, who concentrate oncontrolling their own behavior. Experts try to exercisecontrol by perfecting their knowledge, botb in their pro-fessional and personal lives. Exercising watertight think-ing is extremely important to Experts. Not surprisingly,many accountants, investment analysts, marketing re-searchers, software engineers, and consultants operatefrom the Expert action logic. Secure in tbeir expertise,they present hard data and logic in their efforts to gainconsensus and buy-in for their proposals.Experts are great individual contributors because oftheir pursuit of continuous improvement, efficiency, andperfection. But as managers, they can be problematic be-cause they are so completely sure they are right. Whensubordinates talk about a my-way-or-t he-high way typeof boss, they are probably talking about someone oper-ating from an Expert action logic. Experts tend to viewcollaboration as a waste of time ("Not all meetings are awaste of time - some are canceled!"), and they will fre-quently treat the opinion of people less expert than them-selves with contempt. Emotional intelligence is neitherdesired nor appreciated. As Sun Microsystems' CEO ScottMcNealy put it;"l don't do feelings; I'll leave that to BarryManilow."It comes as no surprise, then, that after unsuccessfullypleading with him to scale back in the face of growinglosses during the dot-com debacle of 2001 and 2002,nearly a dozen members of McNealy's senior manage-ment team left.The AchieverFor those who hope someday to work for a manager whoboth challenges and supports them and creates a positiveteam and interdepartmental atmosphere, the good newsis that a large proportion, 30%, of the managers in our re-search measured as Achievers. While these leaders createa positive work environment and focus their efforts ondeliverables, the downside is that their style often inhibitsthinking outside the box.Achievers have a more complex and integrated under-standing of the world tban do managers who display thethree previous action logics we've described. They're opento feedback and realize that many of the ambiguities andconflicts of everyday life are due to differences in inter-pretation and ways of relating. They know that creativelytransforming or resolving clashes requires sensitivity torelationships and the ability to influence others in posi-tive ways. Achievers can also reliably lead a team to im-plement new strategies over a one- to three-year period,balancing immediate and long-term objectives. One studyof ophthalmologists in private practice showed that thosewho scored as Achievers had lower staff turnover, dele-gated more responsibility, and had practices tbat earnedat least twice the gross annual revenues of those run byExperts.Achievers often find themselves clashing with Experts.The Expert subordinate, in particular, finds the Achieverleader hard to take because he cannot deny the reality ofthe Achiever's success even though he feels superior. Con-sider Hewlett-Packard, where the research engineers tendto score as Experts and the lab managers as higher-levelAchievers. At one project meeting, a lab manager-a de-cided Achiever - slammed her coffee cup on the tableand exclaimed, "1 know we can get 18 features into this,but the customers want delivery some time this century,and the main eight features will do.""Philistine!" snortedone engineer, an Expert. But this kind of conflict isn't al-ways destructive. In fact, it provides much of the fuel thathas ignited -and sustained-the competitiveness of manyof the country's most successful corporations.The IndividualistThe Individualist action logic recognizes that neither itnor any of the otber action logics are "natural"; all areconstructions ofoneselfandthe world. This seemingly ab-70 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW

Seven Transformations of Leadershipstract idea enables tbe io% of Individualist leaders to con-tribute unique practical value to their organizations; tbeyput personalities and ways of relating into perspectiveand communicate well with people who have other ac-tion logics.What sets Individualists apart from Achievers is theirawareness of a possible conflict between their princi-ples and their actions, or between the organization's val-ues and its implementation of those values. This conflictbecomes the source of tension, creativity, and a growingdesire for further development.Individualists also tend to ignore rules they regard asirrelevant, which often makes them a source of irritationto both colleagues and bosses. "So, what do you think?"one of our clients asked us as he was debating whetherto help executives transform their leadership action log-ics, we'll return to tbis story to see how both Sharon andthe CEO migbt bave succeeded in transforming theirs.The StrategistStrategists account for just 4% of leaders. What sets themapart from Individualists is tbeir focus on organizationalconstraints and perceptions, which they treat as discuss-able and transformable. Whereas the Individualist mas-ters communication with colleagues who have differentaction logics, the Strategist masters the second-order or-ganizational impact of actions and agreements. The Strat-egist is also adept at creating shared visions across differ-ent action logics - visions that encourage both personalInitiating change, with its inevitable conflicts, represents agrave threat to the D i p l o m d t , an^ he will avoid it if at allpossible, even to the point of self-destruction.to let go of one of bis star performers, a woman who hadbeen measured as an individualist. Sharon (not her realname) had been asked to set up an offshore shared ser-vice function in the Czech Republic in order to provideIT support to two separate and internally competitivedivisions operating there. She formed a highly cohesiveteam within budget and so far ahead of scbedule tbatshe quipped that she was "delivering services beforeGroup Business Risk had delivered its report saying itcan't be done."The trouble was that Sharon had a reputation witbinthe wider organization as a wild card. Although sheshowed great political savvy when it came to her individ-ual projects, she put many people's noses out of joint inthe larger organization because of her unique, unconven-tional ways of operating. Eventually, the CEO was calledin (not for the first time) to resolve a problem created byher failure to acknowledge key organizational processesand people who weren't on her team.Many of the dynamics created by different action log-ics are illustrated by this story and its outcome. The CEO,whose own action logic was that of an Achiever, did notsee how he could challenge Sharon to develop and movebeyond creating such problems. Although ambivalentabout her, he decided to retain her because she was de-livering and because the organization had recently lostseveral capable, if unconventional, managers.So Sharon stayed, but only for a while. Eventually, sheleft the company to set up an offshoring consultancy.When we examine in the second half of this article howand organizational transformations. Accordingto the Strat-egist's action logic, organizational and social change is aniterative developmental process that requires awarenessand close leadership attention.Strategists deal with conflict more comfortably than dothose with other action logics, and they're better at han-dling people's instinctive resistance to change. As a result.Strategists are highly effective change agents. We foundconfirmation of this in our recent study often CEOs insix different industries. All of their organizations had thestated objective of transforming themselves and had en-gaged consultants to help with the process. Each CEO filledout a Leadership Development Profile, which showedthat five of them were Strategists and the other five fellinto other action logics. The Strategists succeeded in gen-erating one or more organizational transformations overa four-year period; their companies' profitability, marketshare, and reputation all improved. By contrast, only twoof the other five CEOs succeeded in transforming theirorganizations-despite help from consultants, who them-selves profiled as Strategists.Strategists are fascinated with three distinct levels ofsocial interplay: personal relationships, organizational re-lations, and national and international developments.Consider Joan Bavaria, a CtO who, back in 1985, measuredas a Strategist. Bavaria created one of the first socially re-sponsible investment funds, a new subdivision of the in-vestments industry, which by the end of 2001 managedmore than $3 trillion in funds. In 1982, Bavaria foundedTrillium Asset Management, a worker-owned company.APRIL 2005 71

Seven Transformations of Leadershipwhich she still heads. She also cowrote the CERES Envi-ronmental Principles, which dozens of major companieshave signed. In the late 1990s, CERES, working with theUnited Nations, created the Global Reporting Initiative,which supports financial, social, and environmental trans-parency and accountability worldwide.Here we see the Strategist action logic at work. Bavariasaw a unique moment in which to make ethical investinga viable business, then established Trillium to execute herplan. Strategists typically have socially conscious businessideas that are carried out in a highly collaborative man-ner. They seek to weave together idealist visions with prag-matic, timely initiatives and principled actions. Bavariaworked beyond the boundaries of her own organizationto influence the socially responsible investment industryas a whole and later made the development of social andenvironmental accountability standards an internationalendeavor by involving the United Nations. Many Achiev-ers will use their influence to successfully promote theirown companies. The Strategist works to create ethicalprinciples and practices beyond the interests of herself orher organization.The AlchemistThe final leadership action logic for which we have dataand experience is the Alchemist. Our studies of the fewleaders we have identified as Alchemists suggest that whatsets them apart from Strategists is their ability to renewor even reinvent themselves and their organizations inhistorically significant ways. Whereas the Strategist willmove from one engagement to another, tbe Alchemisthas an extraordinary capacity to deal simultaneously withmany situations at multiple levels. The Alchemist can talkwith both kings and commoners. He can deal with imme-diate priorities yet never lose sight of long-term goals.Alchemists constitute i% of our sample, which indicateshow rare it is to find them in business or anywhere else.Through an extensive search process, we found six Al-chemists who were willing to participate in an up-closestudy of their daily actions. Though this is obviously avery small number that cannot statistically justify gener-alization, it's worth noting that all six Alchemists sharedcertain characteristics. On a daily basis, all were engagedin multiple organizations and found time to deal with is-sues raised by each. However, they were not in a constantrush-nor did they devote hours on end to a single activ-ity. Alchemists are typically charismatic and extremelyaware individuals who live by high moral standards. Theyfocus intensely on the truth. Perhaps most important,they're able to catch unique moments in the history oftheir organizations, creating symbols and metaphorsthat speak to people's hearts and minds. In one conser-vative financial services company in the UK, a recentlyappointed CEO turned up for work in a tracksuit insteadof his usual pinstripes but said nothing about it to any-one. People wondered whether this was a new dress code.Weeks later, the CEO spoke publicly about his attire andthe need to be unconventional and to move with greateragility and speed.A more celebrated example of an Alchemist is NelsonMandela. Although we never formally profiled Mandela,he exemplifies the Alchemist action logic. In i995. Man-dela symbolized the unity of a new South Africa whenhe attended the Rugby World Cup game in which theSpringboks, the South African national team, were play-ing. Rugby had been the bastion of white supremacy, butMandela attended the game. He walked on to the pitchwearing the Springboks' jersey so hated by black SouthAfricans, at the same time giving the clenched fist saluteof the ANC, thereby appealing, almost impossibly, both toblack and white South Africans. As Tokyo Sexwale, ANCactivist and premier of South Africa's Gauteng province,said of him: "Only Mandela could wear an enemy jersey.Only Mandela would go down there and be associatedwith the Springboks... All the years in the underground,in the trenches, denial, self-denial, away from home,prison, it was worth it. That's all we wanted to see."Evolving as a LeaderThe most remarkable - and encouraging - finding fromour research is that leaders can transform from one actionlogic to another. We have, in fact, documented a numberof leaders who have succeeded in transforming them-selves from Experts into Achievers, from Achievers intoIndividualists, and from Individualists into Strategists.Take the case of Jenny, one of our clients, who initiallymeasured as an Expert. She became disillusioned withher role in her company's PR department and resigned inorder to, as she said,"sort out what I really want to do." Sixmonths later, she joined a different company in a similarrole, and two years after that we profiled her again andshe still measured as an Expert. Her decision to resignfrom the first company, take a "sabbatical," and then jointhe second company had made no difference to her actionlogic. At that point, Jenny chose to join a group of peerleaders committed to examining their current leadershippatterns and to experimenting with new ways of acting.This group favored the Strategist perspective (and thefounder of the group was profiled as an Alchemist), whichin the end helped Jenny's development. She learned thather habit of consistently taking a critical position, whichshe considered "usefully objective," isolated her and gen-erated distrust. As a result of the peer group's feedback,she started a series of small and private experiments, suchas asking questions rather than criticizing. She realizedthat instead of seeing the faults in others, she had to beclear about what she could contribute and, in doing so,started the move from an Expert to an Achiever. Spiritu-72 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW

Seven Transformations of Leadershipally, Jenny learned that sheneeded an ongoing commu-nity of inquiry at the centerof her life and found a spiri-tual home for continuing re-flection in Quaker meetings,which later supported (andindeed signaled) her transi-tion from an Achiever to anIndividualistT\vo years later, Jenny leftthe second job to start herown company, at which pointshe began profiling as a Strat-egist This was a highly un-usual movement of three ac-tion logics in such a shorttime. We have had only twoother instances in which aleader has transformed twicein less than four years.As Jenny's case illustrates,there are a number of per-sonal changes that can sup-port leadership transforma-tion. Jenny experienced lossof faith in the system and feel-ings of boredom, irritability,burnout,depression, and evenanger. She began to ask her-self existential questions. Butanother indication of a lead-er's readiness to transform is an increasing attraction tothe qualities she begins to intuit in people with more ef-fective action logics. Jenny, as we saw, was drawn to andbenefited hugely from her Strategist peer group as well asfrom a mentor who exhibited the Alchemist action logic.This search for new perspectives ofren manifests itself inpersonal transformations: The ready-to-transform leaderstarts developing new relationships. She may also explorenew forms of spiritual practice or new forms of centeringand self-expression, such as playing a musical instrumentor doing tai chi.External events can also trigger and support transfor-mation. A promotion, for example, may give a leader theopportunity to expand his or her range of capabilities.Earlier, we cited the frustration of Expert research engi-neers at Hewlett-Packard with the product and deliveryattitude of Achiever lab managers. Witbin a year of oneengineer's promotion to lab manager,a role that requiredcoordination of others and cooperation across depart-ments, the former Expert was profiling as an Achiever. Al-though he initially took some heat {"Sellout!") from hisformer buddies, his new Achiever awareness meant thathe was more focused on customers' needs and clearerabout delivery schedules. For the first time, he under-stood the dance between engineers trying to perfect tbetechnology and managers trying to deliver on budget andon schedule.Changes to a manager's work practices and environ-ment can also facilitate transformation. At one companywe studied, leaders changed from Achievers to Individu-alists partly because of simple organizational and processchanges. At the company's senior manager meetings, forexample, executives other than the CEO had the chanceto lead the meetings; tbese opportunities, which weresupported by new spirit of openness, feedback, and frankdebate, fostered professional growth among many of thecompany's leaders.Planned and structured development interventions areanother means of supporting leadership transformation.We worked with a leading oil and gas exploration com-pany on developing the already high-level capabilities ofa pool of future senior managers; the managers wereprofiled and then interviewed by two consultants whoexplored each manager's action logic and how it con-strained and enabled him or her to perform current andrecent roles. Challenges were discussed as well as a viewAPRIL 2005 73

Seven Transformations of Leadershipof the individual's potential and a possible developmen-tal plan. After the exercise, several managers, whose Indi-vidualist and Strategist capabilities had not been fully un-derstood by the company, were appreciated and engageddifferently in their roles. What's more, the organization'sown definition of leadership talent was refrained to in-clude the capabilities of the Individualist and Strategistaction logics. This in turn demanded that the companyradically revisit its competency framework to incorporatesuch expectations as "sees issues from multiple perspec-tives" and "creates deep change without formal power."Now that we've looked generally at some of the changesand interventions that can support leadership develop-ment, let's turn to some specifics about how the mostcommon transformations are apt to take place.From Expert to AchieverThis transformation is the most commonly observed andpracticed among businesspeople and by those in manage-ment and executive education. For the past generation ormore, the training departments of large companies havebeen supporting the development of managers from Ex-perts into Achievers by running programs with titles like"Management by Objectives,""Effective Delegation," and"Managing People for Results." These programs typicallyemphasize getting results through flexible strategies ratherthan through one right method used in one right way.Observant leaders and executive coaches can also for-mulate well-structured exercises and questions relatedto everyday work to help Experts become aware of thedifferent assumptions they and others may be making.particular disciplines such as finance or marketing re-searcb, tend to reinforce the Expert perspective.Still, the transition from Expert to Achiever remainsone of the most painful bottlenecks in most organiza-tions. We've all heard the eternal lament of engineers,lawyers, and other professionals whose Expert success hassaddled them with managerial duties, only to estrangethem from the work they love. Their challenge becomesworking as highly effective Achievers who can continueto use their in-depth expertise to succeed as leaders andmanagers.From Achiever to IndividualistAlthough organizations and business schools have beenrelatively successful in developing leaders to the Achieveraction logic, they have, with few exceptions, a dismalrecord in recognizing, supporting, and actively develop-ing leaders to the Individualist and Strategist action log-ics, let alone to the Alchemist logic. 1 his is not surprising.In many organizations, the Achiever, with his drive andfocus on the endgame, is seen as the finish tine for devel-opment: "This is a competitive industry -^ we need to keepa sharp focus on the bottom line."The development of leaders beyond the Achiever ac-tion logic requires a very different tack from that neces-sary to bring about the Expert-to-Achiever transforma-tion. Interventions must encourage self-awareness onthe part of the evolving leader as well as a greater aware-ness of other worldviews. In both business and personalrelationships, speaking and listening must come to beexperienced not as necessary, taken-for-granted ways ofWhat sets AlchemJsts apart from Strategistsis their ability to renew or even reinvent themselves and theirorganizations in historically significant ways.These efforts can help Experts practice new conversa-tional strategies such as,"You may be right, but I'd like tounderstand what leads you to believe that." In addition,those wishing to push Experts to the next level shouldconsider rewarding Achiever competencies like timely de-livery of results, the ability to manage for performance,and the ability to implement strategic priorities.Within business education, MBA programs are apt toencourage the development of the more pragmatic Achiev-ers by frustrating the perfectionist Experts. The heavyworkloads, use of multidisciplinary and ambiguous casestudies, and teamwork requirements all promote the de-velopment of Achievers. By contrast, MSc programs, incommunicating predetennined ideas but as intrinsicallyforward-thinking, creative actions. Achievers use inquiryto determine whether they (and the teams and organiza-tion to which they belong) are accomplishing their goalsand how they might accomplish them more eftectively.The developing Individualist, however, begins to inquireabout and retlect on the goals themselves-with the aimof improving future goals. Annual development plansthat set new goals, are generated through probing andtrusting conversation, are actively supported throughexecutive coaching, and are carefully reviewed at the endof the cycle can be critical enablers at this point Yet fewboards and CEOs appreciate how valuable this time in-74 HAKVAKU BUSINI-SS REVIEW

Seven T r a n s f o r m a t i o n s o f L e a d e r s h i pvestment can be, and it is all too easily sacrificed in theface of short term objectives, which can seem more press-ing to leaders whose action logics are less developed.Let's go back to the case of Sharon, the Individualist wedescribed earlier whose Achiever CEO wasn't able to man-age her. How might a coach or consultant have helped theCEO feel less threatened by Sharon and more capable ofsupporting her development while also being more opento his own needs and potential? One way would havebeen to try role-playing, asking the CEO to play Sharonwhile the coach or consultant enacts the CEO role. Therole-playing might have gone as follows:"Sharon, I want to talk with you about your future hereat our company. Your completion of the Czech projectunder budget and ahead of time is one more sign that youhave the initiative, creativity, and determination to makethe senior team here. At the same time, I've had to pick upa number of pieces after you that I shouldn't have had to.I'd like to brainstorm together about how you can ap-proach future projects in a way that eliminates this has-sle and gets key players on your side. Then, we can chatseveral times over the next year as you begin to applywhatever new principles we come up with. Does this seemlike a good use of our time, or do you have a different per-spective on the issue?"Note that the consultant in the CEO's role offers clearpraise, a clear description of a limitation, a proposed pathforward, and an inquiry that empowers the CEO (playingSharon) to reframe the dilemma if he wishes. Thus, in-stead of giving the CEO one-way advice about what heshould do, the coach enacts a dialogic scenario with him,illustrating a new kind of practice and letting the CEOjudge whether the enacted relationship is a positive one.The point is not so much to teach the CEO a new conver-sational repertoire but to make him more comfortablewith how the Individualist sees and makes sense of theworld around her and what feedback may motivate herto commit to furtber learning. Such specific experimentswith new ways of listening and talking can gradually dis-solve the fears associated with transformational learning.To Strategist and BeyondLeaders who are moving toward the Strategist and Al-chemist action logics are no longer primarily seekingpersonal skills that will make them more effective withinexisting organizational systems. They will already havemastered many of those skills. Rather, they are exploringthe disciplines and commitments entailed in creatingprojects, teams, networks, strategic alliances, and wholeorganizations on the basis of collaborative inquiry. It isthis ongoing practice of reframing inquiry that makesthem and their corporations so successful.The path toward the Strategist and Alchemist actionlogics is qualitatively different from other leadership de-velopment processes. For a start, emergent Strategists andAlchemists are no longer seeking mentors to help themsharpen existing skills and to guide them toward influen-tial networks (although they may seek spiritual and ethi-cal guidance from mentors). Instead, they are seeking toengage in mutual mentoring with peers who are alreadypart of their networks (such as board members, top man-agers, or leaders within a scientific discipline). The objec-tive of this senior-peer mentoring is not, in conventionalterms, to increase the chances of success but to create asustainable community of people who can challenge theemergent leader's assumptions and practices and those ofhis company, industry, or other area of activity.We witnessed just this kind of peer-to-peer develop-ment when one senior client became concerned that he,his company, and the industry as a whole were operatingat the Achiever level. This concern, of course, was itself asign of his readiness to transform beyond that logic. Thisexecutive-the CEO ofa dental hygiene company-and hiscompany were among the most successful of the parentcompany's subsidiaries. However, realizing that he andthose around him had been keeping their heads down, hechose to initiate a research project - on introducing af-fordable dental hygiene in developing countries-that wasdecidedly out of the box for him and for the corporation.The CEO's timing was right for such an initiative, andhe used the opportunity to engage in collaborative in-quiry with colleagues across the country. Eventually, heproposed an educational and charitable venture, whicbthe parent company funded. The executive was promotedto a new vice presidency for international ventures withinthe parent company - a role he exercised with an in-creased sense of collaboration and a greater feeling of so-cial responsibility for his company in emerging markets.Formal education and development processes can alsoguide individuals toward a Strategist action logic. Pro-grams in which participants act as leaders and challengetheir conventional assumptions about leading and orga-nizing are very effective. Such programs will be eitherlong term (one or two years) or repeated, intense experi-ences that nurture the moment-to-moment awareness ofparticipants, always providing the shock of dissonancethat stimulates them to reexamine their worldviews.Path-breaking programs of this type can be found at afew universities and consultancies around the globe. BathUniversity in the UK, for instance, sponsors a two-yearmaster's degree in responsibility and business practice inwhich students work together during six one-week get-togethers. These programs involve small-learning teams,autobiographical writing, psychodrama, deep experiencesin nature, and a yearlong business project that involvesaction and refiection. Interestingly, many people who at-tend these programs report that these experiences havehad the transformative power ofa life-altering event, suchas a career or existential crisis or a new marriage.2005 75
